{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red24\green24\blue23;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue11;
\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;\red24\green24\blue23;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c12549\c12157\c11765;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c0;
\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99985;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99971;\cssrgb\c12560\c12167\c11760;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs30 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Big: \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 First, there are concerns about what is added to the literature. A more complete justification and adjustment of how space is used in the introduction may help alleviate this concern. \
Second, there are major concerns about the length. I think one possible solution is to move some of the detail of the results to supplemental material, and eliminate much of the irrelevant information, largely in the discussion and several figures. Some relevant info is presently located in supplemental material that instead is vital to readers' understanding. Reorganizing the manuscript extensively is necessary for readability. \
Third, and perhaps most importantly, the focus of the article, in my opinion, doesn't quite highlight the interesting findings. \
Both reviewers question the contribution to the literature, and I think that shifting the focus to some novel or unexpected findings would really enhance the paper.  In particular, I suggest that a focus on the 1-3-6 piece could address this concern.\
The literature review did not set up the study well. In other words, after reading this section, I was not convinced that this study would contribute something new to the dearth of information related to DHOH outcomes. The authors should consider using this section to discuss the process of early intervention referral and services in North Carolina as well as the demographics of communication modality choice that may be unique to the state. Your footnote on page four hints at this conversation.\
In your 3rd hypothesis, you mentioned \'93based on the prior literature summarized above\'94 . There was very little summary of these variables and how they are related to child outcomes. Consider either adding to the literature review discussion centered around the impact of these variables or rewording your hypothesis statement\
\cf4 \cb5 The study addresses important questions about predictors of language delay in DHH children in a population-based sample. However, was the sample size sufficient enough to be able to address the important questions appropriately? \
\cf2 \cb3 The rationale for the study and the knowledge gap that it was filling was not very clear. This left me with the feeling that we already knew the results which makes it difficult assess the importance of the study.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cb3 \

\f1\b0 The rationale for the study was not clear. I was left with the feeling that we knew the findings already. However, I am not sure that is correct but because of the way the introduction was written, there was little detail about the background. \
without including sufficient background information in the introduction, the rationale for the study is not clear. What is the knowledge gap that the study is trying to fill? This made it difficult to see how the results added to what we already know from the literature, as described in the paragraph at the bottom of page 3. Is the rationale that these factors haven\'92t been investigated in one sample before? Why was a fuller overview of the literature included in the supplemental materials? Was it because of the length of the manuscript? If so, there was a lot of focus on the CDI in the introduction and that space could have been spent on the background overview.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 \
The results section was well explained but it was very lengthy. \
My main concern with the paper in its current format is that after reading it several times, I am not entirely sure what the paper is telling me in terms of findings, but I think that might be because of the lack of a clear rationale in the introduction.\
\cf4 \cb5 The discussion section was very lengthy and difficult to follow in parts because it goes off topic in several points and does not stick to discussing the results of the study. I read the paper and the discussion several times to try to make sense of the implications of the main findings.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cf2 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 The main issues were that the manuscript is simply too long in its current format with too much relevant information contained in the supplemental materials (which were not even all accessible).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \
Medium:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 It would be beneficial to have a discussion related to how the sample collected represents children who are DHOH overall (e.g. 2nd language learners, LSL vs TC). I think this discussion should not be focused on your sample specifically but the trends in the country related to communication modalities and demongraphics\
You focused on 1-3-6 guidelines in your analysis. This is significant when considering child outcomes. A brief summary of the guidelines and previous research would better support why you examined this variable.\
My suggestion would be to remove the discussion of the CDI. This would be more appropriate, in a more summarized form, in the methods section. The purpose of the paper was not to analyze the CDI and its validity, but to describe a certain population and their outcomes. If the paper was about the CDI, then it would be appropriate to have this discussion in the literature review. Focus on WHY the paper was written and how it contributes to the limited information related to the outcomes of children who are DHOH\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa300\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb6 Was the CDI just spoken language or were signs also accounted for?\cf2 \cb3 \
Line 197- A better explanation of what WordBank norms are is warranted. It is difficult to make comment/ draw conclusions on how the results, using this value, that were derived without further explanation. Was the following paragraph (starting at line 199) an explanation of this? If so, this is unclear.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa300\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb5 There were several variables put into the regression model and discussed in previous sections that are not again mentioned. For example, were there any significant findings for gender and how it relates to a vocabulary delay?\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cf2 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 While I personally agree with the discussion related to using sign language as a foundation for language prior to spoken language, it seems to go beyond the scope of the current paper to make these claims. I think it is a point worth mentioning, but maybe more in passing, rather than such a full discussion\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 \
As clearly said a few times in the child-level variables sections (results and discussion), the relationships were not surprising or contributory to the findings of this study. It seemed like this section could be significantly reduced.\
The paragraph at the top of page 17 makes a very important point about total communication and language delays. Could more be made of this?\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cf4 \cb5 The sample is representative on the one hand because it is a population based study \'96 but on the other hand, it has a very small sample size for a population-based study. So what does this add to our knowledge over what we know already from larger scale cohort population studies? What was the rationale for stopping at 100? Was a power analysis conducted to explain the stopping point? If the data were coming from an ongoing collaboration, why not continue to collect more data which would allow more factors to be investigated? Is 100 sufficient to say it is a representative sample? Was it stratified across factors before stopping at 100?\cf2 \cb3 \
\cf4 \cb5 Not having race or SES information is a limitation - is it possible that the identified predictors might have been acting as a proxy for race or SES?\cf2 \cb3 \
The third paragraph on page 17 was about how researchers could construct samples \'96 the argument didn\'92t seem to follow on logically. If the target subpopulation represents 14% of a population, why would trying to recruit a sample of 32 be difficult? I didn\'92t follow this argument as many studies achieve these sample sizes.\
third paragraph was about spoken vocab delays increasing with age \'96 this is not a novel finding to warrant so much focus.\
I agree that the authors should mention the advantages of sign language but including a whole page dedicated to it when it is not mentioned in the study doesn\'92t seem in keeping with the rest of the study.
\f0\b \
Small:\

\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb5 How many families in ELSSP did not agree to participate? Report the acceptance percentage
\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \

\f1\b0 If early intervention is birth to 36 months, how were some children older than 36 months? (line 131)\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Table 1 does not add significant information. This can be added to the text and not documented in a chart.\
Table 2- is not necessary to report the type of variable (continuous vs categorical). The ranges can be reported within the text of the methods section.\
Supplementary material 1- this study was not a metanalysis, this chart does not seem necessary\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 I do not have access to S2-4, and cannot comment on them\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 In the predictors of vocabulary section- when talking about vocabulary delays, was this just spoken language? Should be very clear that a child can have vocabulary, but may not be in spoken language.\
When considering vocabulary delay, why was communication modality not considered? This would make a significant impact on spoken language / overall language use.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Use people first language - children who are DHOH\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 52- Dont start a sentence with the word "however".\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 52- Dont use the word "excellent" this term is a vague descriptor and the author shouldnt put judgement on the quality of studies without discussing evidence (which I am sure they didnt want to do in this case).\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 The footnote on page 4 was an odd placement. Should be included in the methods section.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 120- "passed along" is informal language, consider revising\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 122- switch the clause order. Start with "Given our goal\'85" Some people call this "upside down subordination"\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cf7 \cb5 \ul \ulc7 Line 135 "for whom Spanish" is awkward wording. Consider "Families, whose primary language was Spanish, \'85.\cf2 \cb1 \ulnone \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Footnote 5- there is a typo\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 257- dont start a sentence with a number, use the word form\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 267 - "next zoomed in on" is informal language, consider revising\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 301- don't end a sentence with "within", its a preposition\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 347- awkward sentence. I would reword to say "amplification devices were commonly used for children with more significant hearing loss"\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 388 this is an odd citation. Was this intentional?\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 398- was the use of "dint" purposeful? Odd wording in this sentence\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 510- other factors\'85 such as? (give examples)\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 293- awkward phrasing : Taken together these analyses reveal that beyond aspects of the 293 child's hearing status, other variables too contribute to delays in both diagnoses and intervention. 294 We return to this point in the discussion.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Line 441- need a citation for AAP estimate statement\
The figures and tables were not in APA format. For example, all were missing a title, making it difficult to decipher the purpose of the document. Figures often have notes to explain the information.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 There were several figures and tables that seem to be unnecessary. For example, I am not understanding the value of figure 4. It seems this information could be reported within the body of the text. Maybe further explanation is warranted if the authors feel it is valuable.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cb3 Can information within the supplemental material be combined into 1 chart? This would make the information easier to access.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cb3 I am not able to view S2-4 and cannot make comment on them.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 There was missing information about the participants. How many had comorbid factors? Table 2 contains a list of information about the background/audiological factors. The range and mean/SD were included for the continuous factors. But the categorical categories had the category labels only and no frequency information. This information is crucial to be able to understand the characteristics of the sample.\
The manuscript stated that the literature review had been moved to supplemental materials. I searched but I was unable to locate these materials. \
Data exclusions \'96 5 children who had missing data for 1-3-6 and 13 children had missing data for degree of deafness were excluded. Why were 13 excluded rather than 18? Line 227 -\
JSLHR has an international audience, please explain 1-3-6.\
Why were the tables in Excel sheets that had to be downloaded rather than being in APA format?
\f0\b \
Compliments: \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 Your study had interesting findings related to the language outcomes of children who are Deaf and Hard of Hearing for children within your state. \
This is a fantastic sample size that can nicely capture outcomes within your state.\
More studies that include a diverse sample of children who are DHOH are needed. This study is a piece in describing outcomes for children with multiple needs and are bilingual. It also demonstrates the importance of early identification and early intervention.\
Clearly written results section. I appreciated the organization and the reminder of the purpose at the start of each section.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Several great clinical points were made in this section. You nicely summed up your findings and made them relevant clinically and for a bigger picture (legislative changes that may need to be made)\
A major strength of this study was that the data and code are available on the OFS ensuring transparency. The statistics and violin plots were very clear and informative.\
The calculation of the vocabulary delay scores was a strength of the study and it was well explained.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cb3 A strength of the discussion was the frank and open discussion about the complexity of the results in the sense that the factors are all interrelated. Many authors try to simplify the story but the current authors should be applauded for not doing this. \
The paragraph at the top of page 17 makes a very important point about total communication and language delays. 
\f0\b \

\f1\b0 The topic is very interesting and relevant. I think it could have potential 
\f0\b \

\f1\b0 The results section was well explained\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 The models were detailed and appropriate and the process was described clearly.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 }